THE ART OF DREAMING
By Carlos Castaneda
[Version 1.1 - Originally scanned, proofed and released by BELTWAY ]
[If you correct any errors, please increment the version number and re-release.]

AUTHOR'S NOTE:
Over the past twenty years, I have written a series of books about my apprenticeship with 
a Mexican Yaqui Indian sorcerer, don Juan Matus. I have explained in those books that 
he taught me sorcery but not as we understand sorcery in the context of our daily world: 
the use of supernatural powers over others, or the calling of spirits through charms, 
spells, or rituals to produce supernatural effects. For don Juan, sorcery was the act of 
embodying some specialized theoretical and practical premises about the nature and role 
of perception in molding the universe around us.
Following don Juan's suggestion, I have refrained from using shamanism, a category 
proper to anthropology, to classify his knowledge. I have called it all along what he 
himself called it: sorcery. On examination, however, I realized that calling it sorcery 
obscures even more the already obscure phenomena he presented to me in his teachings.
In anthropological works, shamanism is described as a belief system of some native 
people of northern Asia-prevailing also among certain native North American Indian 
tribes-which maintains that an unseen world of ancestral spiritual forces, good and evil, 
is pervasive around us and that these spiritual forces can be summoned or controlled 
through the acts of practitioners, who are the intermediaries between the natural and 
supernatural realms.
Don Juan was indeed an intermediary between the natural world of everyday life and an 
unseen world, which he called not the supernatural but the second attention. His role as a 
teacher was to make this configuration accessible to me. I have described in my previous 
work his teaching methods to this effect, as well as the sorcery arts he made me practice, 
the most important of which is called the art of dreaming.
Don Juan contended that our world, which we believe to be unique and absolute, is only 
one in a cluster of consecutive worlds, arranged like the layers of an onion. He asserted 
that even though we have been energetically conditioned to perceive solely our world, we 
still have the capability of entering into those other realms, which are as real, unique, 
absolute, and engulfing as our own world is.
Don Juan explained to me that, for us to perceive those other realms, not only do we have 
to covet them but we need to have sufficient energy to seize them. Their existence is 
constant and independent of our awareness, he said, but their inaccessibility is entirely a 
consequence of our energetic conditioning. In other words, simply and solely because of 
that conditioning, we are compelled to assume that the world of daily life is the one and 
only possible world.
Believing that our energetic conditioning is correctable, don Juan stated that sorcerers of 
ancient times developed a set of practices designed to recondition our energetic 
capabilities to perceive. They called this set of practices the art of dreaming.
With the perspective time gives, I now realize that the most fitting statement don Juan 
made about dreaming was to call it the "gateway to infinity." I remarked, at the time he 
said it, that the metaphor had no meaning to me.
"Let's then do away with metaphors," he conceded. "Let's say that dreaming is the 
sorcerers' practical way of putting ordinary dreams to use."
"But how can ordinary dreams be put to use?" I asked.
"We always get tricked by words," he said. "In my own case, my teacher attempted to 
describe dreaming to me by saying that it is the way sorcerers say good night to the 
world. He was, of course, tailoring his description to fit my mentality. I'm doing the same 
with you."
On another occasion don Juan said to me, "Dreaming can only be experienced. Dreaming 
is not just having dreams; neither is it daydreaming or wishing or imagining. Through 
dreaming we can perceive other worlds, which we can certainly describe, but we can't 
describe what makes us perceive them. Yet we can feel how dreaming opens up those 
other realms. Dreaming seems to be a sensation-a process in our bodies, an awareness 
in our minds."
In the course of his general teachings, don Juan thoroughly explained to me the 
principles, rationales, and practices of the art of dreaming. His instruction was divided 
into two parts.. One was about dreaming procedures, the other about the purely abstract 
explanations of these procedures. His teaching method was an interplay between enticing 
my intellectual curiosity with the abstract principles of dreaming and guiding me to seek 
an outlet in its practices.
I have already described all this in as much detail as I was able to. And I have also 
described the sorcerers' milieu in which don Juan placed me in order to teach me his arts. 
My interaction in this milieu was of special interest to me because it took place 
exclusively in the second attention. I interacted there with the ten women and five men 
who were don Juan's sorcerer companions and with the four young men and the four 
young women who were his apprentices.
Don Juan gathered them immediately after I came into his world. He made it clear to me 
that they formed a traditional sorcerers' group-a replica of his own party-and that I 
was supposed to lead them. However, working with me he realized that I was different 
than he expected. He explained that difference in terms of an energy configuration seen 
only by sorcerers: